# Exploring the Effects of Socioeconomic Factors and Student Behaviours on Mathematics Performance using Regression Analysis

**Abstract**

In this report, data collected on high school students from Portugal was used to predict final math grades for those students using socioeconomic factors and student behaviour. A rigorous process was conducted to select the best model which included using stepwise regression to come up with a preliminary model and then checking for outliers and multicollinearity and then assuring that the assumptions that must hold for linear regression to be accurate held true. The final model selected after the rigorous selection process uses the education level of the student’s mother, the occupation of the student’s mother, the number of times the student had failed in the past, whether the student was in a romantic relationship, how often the student went out with friends and how much free time the student usually had in order to predict the student’s final math grade. This model is significant and can predict a student’s math score with some level of accuracy, however, the model is not able to explain a good amount of the variance in the data and thus it is clear that more than just these factors will explain a student’s math grade. This model is important in showing some interesting exploratory analysis into the kinds of factors that can influence success in mathematics as students. This model can show that the backgrounds of our parents, especially our mothers, our past failures and student behaviours are correlated with success in mathematics. Perhaps of course this can be extended to many subjects in school and to our general success in high school. Overall, this report reveals that the students who have a strong maternal support at home, don’t fail classes often and balance their time well between school work and going out with friends will be more likely to succeed than others and it is through this model that we can see the possibilities of the kinds of effects these factors have on our success in mathematics and by extension our success in school.

---
This abstract is a part of a larger report done on the analysis of the data taken from *P. Cortez and A. Silva. Using Data Mining to Predict Secondary School Student Performance. In A. Brito and J. Teixeira Eds., Proceedings of 5th FUture BUsiness TEChnology Conference (FUBUTEC 2008) pp. 5-12, Porto, Portugal, April 2008, EUROSIS, ISBN 978-9077381-39-7.* 

Data was retrieved from *UCI Machine Learning Repository: Student Performance Data Set. https://archive.ics.uci.edu/ml/datasets/Student Performance.*
